Hints/guidance for thread-safety (#6707)
cython/cython: docs/src/userguide/freethreading.rst

   (i.e. all in one go, without switching to another thread) on non-free-threaded builds.
   Many operations can cause the GIL to be released. Some more detail is in the section
   :ref:`gil_as_lock`.

Opinionated Suggestions
=======================

This section contains our views on how to use Cython effectively with free-threaded
Python.  It may evolve as our understanding grows.

Interaction between threads
---------------------------

> Multi-threaded programs general work best if you can minimize the interaction between
> threads for example by having the different threads perform completely isolated
> blocks of work which are only collected at the end.  Python code is no exception -
> especially since Python reference counting means that even apparently "read-only"
> operations usually actually involve both reading and writing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-threaded programs generally work best if you can minimize the interaction between
threads. It's optimal if the different threads perform completely isolated
blocks of work which are only collected at the end.  Python code is no exception -
especially since Python's reference counting means that even apparent "read-only"
operations can actually involve both reading and writing.
```

As an example consider a program that collects unique words from multiple files.
In this case it would probably be best to read each file to a separate ``set``
and then combine them at the end::

  def read_from_files_good(filenames):
    def read_from_file(filename):
      out = set()
      with open(filename, 'r') as f:
        for line in f:
          words = line.split()
          for word in words:
            out.add(word)
      return out

    overall_result = set()
    with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor() as executor:
      for file_result in executor.map(read_from_file, filenames):
        overall_result.update(file_result)
    return overall_result

rather than updating one ``set`` from all threads::

>   def read_from_files_bad(filenames):
>     overall_result = set()
>     def read_from_file(filename):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  def read_from_files_bad(filenames):
    overall_result = set()

    def read_from_file(filename):
```

      with open(filename, 'r') as f:
        for line in f:
          words = line.split()
          for word in words:
            overall_result.add(word)

    with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor() as executor:
      for _ in executor.map(read_from_file, filenames):
        pass
    return overall_result

The less your threads interact, the less chance there is for bugs, the less
need there is for locking to control their interaction, and the less likely
they are to slow each other down by invaliding the CPU cache for other
threads.

Should you use ``prange``?
--------------------------

Although ``prange`` is the parallelization mechanism *built in* to Cython, it
is not the only option, and probably should not be your default option.

``prange`` is a fairly thin wrapper over OpenMP's "parallel for".  This means
it is ideal for problems where you have a big loop, every iteration is basically
the same, and the result of each iteration is independent of any other iteration.

> If this does not describe your problem then ``prange`` is probably not the
> solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this does *not* describe your problem then ``prange`` is probably not the solution.
```

> Remember that all the threading options available in Python are also available
> in Cython.  For example you can start threads with ``threading.Thread`` or
> ``concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor`` and this is much more flexible than
> ``prange``.  Similarly the synchronization tools in ``threading.Thread``
> are also available in Cython.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that all the threading options available in Python are also available
in Cython.  For example, you can start threads with ``threading.Thread`` or
``concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor``. They are much more flexible than
``prange``.  Similarly, the synchronization tools in ``threading.Thread``
are also available in Cython.
```

Try to avoid Python code in ``prange``
--------------------------------------

> ``prange`` has some slightly unintuitive behaviour about which data is
> shared and which isn't.  Typically C variables (e.g. ``int``, ``float``) are
> treated as "thread-local" and so each thread has its own copy. However,
> Python object variables are treated as shared between all the threads.

Reviewer: `int` and `float` do not seem the optimal pair of examples for non-Python types.
```suggestion
``prange`` has some slightly unintuitive behaviour about which data is
shared and which isn't.  Typically C variables (e.g. ``int``, ``double``) are
treated as "thread-local" and so each thread has its own copy. However,
Python object variables are treated as shared between all the threads.
```

This means that::

  cdef int i
  cdef int total = 0
  for i in cython.parallel.prange(10, nogil=True):
    tmp = i**2
    total += tmp

> should work fine - each thread has its own ``tmp`` and ``total`` is
> a "reduction" (so treated in a thread-safe manner).  However::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should work fine - each thread has its own ``tmp`` and ``total`` is
a "reduction" (so treated in an efficient thread-safe way).  However::
```

  cdef int i
  cdef int total = 0
  cdef object tmp
  for i in cython.parallel.prange(10, nogil=True):
    with gil:
      tmp = i**2
      total += tmp

> In this case there is only a single value of ``tmp`` shared between all the threads, and
> all are continuously overwriting each other's values.  Additionally Cython does not
> currently ensure that ``tmp`` is even reference-counted correctly so you are at risk
> of crashes or memory-leaks in addition to getting a nonsense answer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, there is only a single value of ``tmp`` shared between all the threads.
They are continuously overwriting each other's values.  Additionally, Cython does not
currently ensure that ``tmp`` is even reference-counted in a thread-safe way,
so you are at risk of crashes or memory-leaks in addition to getting a nonsense answer.
```
Is the refcounting still going to be a threading issue with Cython 3.1?

Author: > Is the refcounting still going to be a threading issue with Cython 3.1?

Probably - assuming that 3.1 is soon.

The current situation is that true Cython internals (like its exception state in `prange` functions) should be thread-safe, but user-defined locals aren't and remain their responsibility.

The refcounting would be fixed by https://github.com/cython/cython/pull/6226 (or more likely a cleaner follow-up). That hasn't been high-priority for me because:
*  it's feels like it'll end up like `boundcheck(False)` - everyone will just turn it off everywhere "for speed" without really thinking.
* it'll only cover read and write; most real parallel code needs "compare exchange" or "swap" or similar, which user's will still have to write themselves. So it may not be hugely useful.

I still plan to improve it if possible, but I'm relaxed about it missing 3.1.

> If you do want to work with Python objects then it is best to move them into
> a function and just have the loop call the function::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do want to work with Python objects, then it is best to move them into
a function and just have the loop call the function::
```

>   cdef int square(int x):
>     cdef object tmp = x**2
>     return tmp
> 
>   # ...
> 
>   cdef int i
>   cdef int total = 0
>   for i in cython.parallel.prange(10, nogil=True):
>     with gil:
>       total += square(i)
> 
> Since ``tmp`` is now local to the function scope, each function call has its own copy
> and thus there is no conflict between threads.

Reviewer: I missed the bit that the function return value is safe because it's converted to a C `int`. Let's make that clearer.
```suggestion
  cdef int square(int x):
    cdef object tmp = x**2
    cdef int result = tmp
    return result

  # ...

  cdef int i
  cdef int total = 0
  for i in cython.parallel.prange(10, nogil=True):
    with gil:
      total += square(i)

Since ``tmp`` is now local to the function scope, each function call has its own copy
and thus there is no conflict of Python objects between threads.
```

``libcpp`` is provided for convenience but it does nothing that can't be done
with regular Cython code.

The C standard library also provides some of these features (e.g. atomic variables
and mutexes).  However, compiler support for the C++ standard library is better
(in particular for MSVC) and the C++ standard library is more fully featured,
so we recommend this first.

One difficulty is with types that are not default constructable or moveable
(e.g. ``latch``, ``semaphore``, ``barrier``).  These are difficult to
stack-allocate because of how Cython's code-genertion works, so you
need to heap-allocate them::

  from libcpp.latch cimport latch

  l = new latch(2)
  try:
    ...  # use the latch
  finally:
    del l

It is also possible to use C++ to create new threads (for example, using the ``std::jthread``
class).  This works, but we generally recommend creating threads through Python
instead, mainly because the outermost ``with gil:`` statement in a non-Python
created thread will not work reliably with multiple subinterpreters - this recommendation is
therefore mainly to future-proofing your code and not restrict where it can

> be used from.  It is a fairly soft suggestion though, so feel free to ignore

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should also mention that one needs to register C++ created threads with the interpreter or they cannot run Python code in them?

Author: That should be what the outermost ``with gil:` is for, but I'll change the text a little to clarify

it if you have good reason to.

``cython.critical_section`` vs GIL
----------------------------------

Understanding what protection a ``critical_section`` provides is
important to being able to use it safely,  and it's also worth comparing
it to the guarantees that the GIL provides.  Unfortunately some of
this is very much an implementation detail of Python at the moment, so
may be subject to change.

What is guaranteed to be safe for both of ``critical_section`` and
the GIL (on non-freethreading builds) is reading and writing to
``cdef`` attributes of extension types::

  cdef class C:
    cdef object attr

  ...
  
  cdef C c_instance = C()
  with cython.critical_section(c_instance):
    c_instance.attr = something

  with cython.critical_section(c_instance):
    something = c_instance.attr

In principle, both a ``critical_section`` and the GIL can be interrupted

> by executing arbitrary Python code.  Arbitrary Python code can notable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by executing arbitrary Python code.  Arbitrary Python code can notably
```

include the finalizers of any objects being destroyed.  This means that
reassigning a Python attribute can trigger arbitrary code (but typically
only after the new value has been put in place).  Additionally, triggering
the GC can result in arbitrary code being executed (which means any Python

> memory allocation can trigger it).

Author: TODO: Memory allocation can trigger the GC in Python <3.11. Still worth noting but should caveat it.

For example, in the following code (which uses the definition of ``C`` from
the previous example)::

  with cython.critical_section(c_instance):
    c_instance.attr = c_instance.attr + 1

the addition gets expanded to something like

.. code-block:: C

  temp1 = c_instance->attr;

  // May trigger arbitrary Python code:
  // 1. If ``temp1`` is a class with an "__add__" method
  // 2. If the allocation of the result triggers the GC.
  temp2 = PyNumber_Add(temp1, const_1);

  // this section is hidden inside a ``Py_SETREF`` or similar
  {
    temp3 = c_instance->attr; 
    c_instance->attr = temp2;
    // May trigger arbitrary Python code through finalizers
    Py_DECREF(temp3);
  }

(we show normal addition rather than in-place addition for ease
of explanation, but the result is similar).

> Practically there are some difference between ``critical_section`` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Practically there are some differences between ``critical_section`` 
```

and the GIL:

* Releasing the GIL happens at fairly regular intervals after
  a certail number of bytecode instructions.
* Interrupting a ``critical_section`` only happens if the interpreter
  hits a deadlock (i.e. some other operation tries to get a critical
  section on the same object).

The upshot is the if you're sure that no other code will have a
reference to ``c_instance`` the example above is safe in a free-threaded
interpreter (although arbitrary code may run, it won't interact with

> ``c_instance``) but unsafe in GIL-interpreter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``c_instance``) but unsafe in a GIL-enabled interpreter.
```

It is also possible to use C++ to create new threads (for example, using the ``std::jthread``
class).  This works, but we generally recommend creating threads through Python
instead.  For a C++-created thread it's necessary to register them with the interpreter
by calling ``with gil:`` before using any Python objects and this will not work reliably

> with multiple subinterpreters - this recommendation is therefore mainly to future-proofing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with multiple subinterpreters - this recommendation is therefore mainly to future-proof
```

  with cython.critical_section(c_instance):
    something = c_instance.attr

The first and most obvious place that both a ``critical_section`` and
the GIL can be interrupted is a ``with nogil:`` block.  This is hopefully
absolutely obvious for the GIL but it's worth noting that a critical
section only applies when the Python thread state is held.

In principle, both a ``critical_section`` and the GIL can be interrupted
by executing arbitrary Python code.  Arbitrary Python code can notably
include the finalizers of any objects being destroyed.  This means that
reassigning a Python attribute can trigger arbitrary code (but typically
only after the new value has been put in place).  Additionally, triggering
the GC can result in arbitrary code being executed. On Python <3.12 any
Python memory allocation can trigger the GC so be wary of this if you

> aim to supprt multithreading in those version (the first free-threaded

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
aim to supprt multithreading in those versions (the first free-threaded
```
